### **Bhagavad-Gītā 4.3 — IAST**

**sa evāyaṃ mayā tē ’dya yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ |
bhaktō ’si mē sakhā cēti rahasyaṃ hyētad uttamam ||**

---

### **Word-by-word and Grammatical Explanation**

#### First line:

**saḥ eva ayam mayā te adya yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ**

1. **saḥ**
   * "that" (pronoun, masculine nominative singular)

     ⟶ "That very [yoga]"
2. **eva**
   * emphasis particle

     ⟶ "indeed" / "verily"
3. **ayam**
   * "this" (pronoun, masculine nominative singular)

     ⟶ "this [same one]"
4. **mayā**
   * "by me" (instrumental singular of  *aham* )

     ⟶ "by me"
5. **te**
   * "to you" (dative singular of  *tvam* )

     ⟶ "to you"
6. **adya**
   * "today" (indeclinable adverb)

     ⟶ "today"
7. **yogaḥ**
   * "yoga" (masculine nominative singular)

     ⟶ "the yoga"
8. **proktaḥ**
   * "spoken" or "taught" (past passive participle, masculine nominative singular of √vac)

     ⟶ "has been taught"
9. **purātanaḥ**
   * "ancient" (adjective, masculine nominative singular, qualifies  *yogaḥ* )

     ⟶ "ancient"

⟶ " **That very (saḥ eva) ancient (purātanaḥ) yoga (yogaḥ) has been taught (proktaḥ) by me (mayā) to you (te) today (adya)** "

---

#### Second line:

**bhaktaḥ asi me sakhā ca iti rahasyam hi etat uttamam**

10. **bhaktaḥ**
    * "devotee" (masculine nominative singular)

      ⟶ "you are a devotee"
11. **asi**
    * "you are" (2nd person singular of  *as* , "to be")

      ⟶ "are"
12. **me**
    * "my" (genitive singular of  *aham* )

      ⟶ "my"
13. **sakhā**
    * "friend" (masculine nominative singular)

      ⟶ "friend"
14. **ca**
    * "and" (indeclinable conjunction)

      ⟶ "and"
15. **iti**
    * "thus" (quotation marker or final particle)

      ⟶ "[for this reason]"
16. **rahasyam**
    * "secret" (neuter nominative/accusative singular)

      ⟶ "secret"
17. **hi**
    * "indeed / because" (emphatic particle)

      ⟶ "indeed"
18. **etat**
    * "this" (neuter nominative/accusative singular)

      ⟶ "this"
19. **uttamam**
    * "supreme / highest" (neuter accusative singular)

      ⟶ "supreme"

⟶ " **Because you are (asi) my (me) devotee (bhaktaḥ) and (ca) friend (sakhā), this (etat) is indeed (hi) the supreme (uttamam) secret (rahasyam)** "

---

### **Full English Translation**

**"That same ancient yoga has been told today by Me to you, because you are My devotee and friend. This is indeed the supreme secret."**
